Maharashtra Day, commonly known as Maharashtra Din (Marathi: महाराष्ट्र दिन) is a state holiday[1] in the Indian state of Maharashtra, commemorating the formation of the state of Maharashtra in India.[2] from the division of the Bombay State on 1 May 1960.[1] Maharashtra Day is commonly associated with parades and political speeches and ceremonies, in addition to various other public and private events celebrating the history and traditions of Maharashtra. It is celebrated to commemorate the creation of a Marathi speaking state of Maharashtra. 

A Brief History of Maharashtra Diwas
The States Reorganisation Act, 1956 demarcated each Indian state on the basis of languages. However, in the erstwhile Bombay, different languages were spoken, including Marathi, Gujarati, Kutchi and Konkani. This is when the Sanyukta Maharashtra Samiti started a movement demanding a separate state.

Parallelly, another movement called Mahagujarat Movement started. The latter's demand was to have a separate state for all the Gujarati-speaking people. These movements were marred with frequent clashed between the two groups demanding a separate state for their community. Finally, peace was restored with the introduction of Bombay Reorganization Act.

As a result of this movement or andolan, the state of Maharashtra and Gujarat were formed according to the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960. The legislation came into effect on 1 May 1960, the same day as the International Worker's Day.

How is Maharashtra Day Celebrated?
Each year, the Government of Maharashtra has considered 1 May as a public holiday to commemorate the birth of the state. Most educational institutions like schools, colleges, offices remain closed on this special day. The day begins with a parade at Shivaji Park, Dadar. The Governor of the state along with the state reserve police, home guards, Mumbai Police, BMC Force, traffic police, among others take part in the parade. Several events are held showcasing the culture and traditions of Maharashtra.

A flag is hoisted at the respective district headquarters in the presence of dignitaries as they commemorate the day with tributes to martyrs on this day. Personalities from various backgrounds such as sportspersons, police officials, and doctors are rewarded in recognition of this notable service to the state.

Celebrations by the people of Maharashtra, on this Maharashtra Diwas, celebrate the day with traditional Lavani performances - narration of poems written by Marathi saints, while processions are held across the state. The State government and several private companies take the opportunity to inaugurate and launch new projects and schemes on Maharashtra Day. Incidentally, this day is also celebrated as the International Labour Day across the world, which is being observed since the 19th century.